We're at
35.
35. Okay, let's
do today. I'm going to squat 285 kg and
I'm going to take you every step of the
way, including right now you're warming
up with me. I'm here on the leg press
and I'm starting with zero weight. I've
got my feet low on the board and I'm
letting my heels lift so that I can push
through the balls of my feet and get my
hamstring press against my calf. That's
how I make it a knee dominant or a
quadricep dominant leg press. So, a
regular leg press that you'd see is is
kind of like feet are up high and it's
very hip dominant. So, there's a lot
more hip bend and not as much. Look at
the bottom position. There's like 90°
here compared
to this variation where I'm specifically
trying to warm up my knees and I take
them through the
full range of motion. I like this
exercise to build
quads. Another plate. Five more
reps. Another
plate. Five more reps. Why don't you
rest please? Well, I'll start resting
when the weight gets a bit heavier.
Another plate. Five more
reps. Yeah. So, what I think with the
leg press
is full knee bend for this style. Of
course, I showed you the two different
techniques, but for me, I don't know. My
hips are always okay and I'll get my
it's a hip dominant squat, so I'll get
more of a hip warm up when I'm actually
doing the squat, but this is all about
making my knees feel young again. Lots
and lots of reps. Builds up the synovial
fluid around the joints and it makes it
feel good. But also, you know, this is
three red plates aside, so that's 150 kg
total. Not a huge amount, but then it
gets me to the point where I'm doing my
empty barbell squat and it just feels
nice and
smooth. Nice little warm up. Now, I'm
going to go through all the equipment
that I'm going to be using because I'm
going to start with it straight away.
So, first things you'll see is my knee
sleeves. These are ins and knee sleeves.
Not sponsored. Um, I just use them
because they're really good. Now, look
at them folded down. That means they're
not on my they're not helping my knees
for my warm-ups, but now I'm going to
fold them
up. So, that does give me the support.
These are very stiff. Takes time to get
used to. They're quite uncomfortable.
Um, but I'd say if you're a competitive
squatter, these are the ones you
want. If you're a competitive
powerlifting squatter in sleeves, these
are the ones you want. You get a lot
more carryover than all of the regular
soft neoprene sleeves. This is a new
generation of sleeves. Borderline
equipped if you ask me. It's not as good
as wraps, but it's definitely better
than the regular sleeves. So, there's my
my knee sleeves. Check out my squat
shoes. They're actually boxing
shoes. And I figured out after a boxing
session, I didn't want to change my
shoes. And I started squatting and I
thought, "Huh, these are really
comfortable." So, what am I looking for
in a squat shoe? for a low bar squat, a
flat sold shoe um and and very hard sole
as well. So, this is minimal support um
at the bottom. So, it's it's pretty
flat. There's like, you know, half a
cime of raised heel, which really offers
not much, but it's all about the
comfort. Plus, if you look closely,
these make my calves look bigger. Check
it out. They're not really that big in
real life, but the shoes make them look
big. You like that? Next
up, here's my 10
mm powerlifting belt from Pioneer. See
the customization? This is called
Murdered Out. Australian strength coach.
How sick is that? So, look at this
lever. Best lever in the game. So, you
got the the um I think it's like
centimeter increment or whatever it is,
a half inch increments. This is the
best. So, this is from Pioneer 10 mil.
So, when I'm going really heavy, a lot
of people have the option between 13 mil
and 10 mil. I used to think that when it
came to belts that the thicker belt
offered more support, but I don't think
it does anymore because I don't believe
this stretches at all. It's 10 mm
leather and it's very firm leather. This
is very high quality leather. So, it
doesn't stretch when I'm tight and
I brace. It's not pushing out. So, why
does it matter if I get a thinner or a
thicker one? So, the thinner belt, it
contours to my body a lot better. It's a
lot more more comfortable than the thick
13 mm belt that a lot of people are
wearing. So, 10 mil is my choice. Uh,
what else? I will be using wrist wraps.
These are my favorite wrist wraps. By
the way, I'm not sponsored by anyone.
This is what I've always used. Gangster
wraps by Mark
Bell. These are my favorite. They're
soft. So, when it comes to wrist wraps
versus knee wraps, it's not the same
equipment. The knee wraps, I want them
to be a lot more firm, but the wrist
joint is a lot smaller than the knee
joint. You don't need the same amount of
support. You need more comfort. So,
gangster wraps for my
wrists. What else am I missing? This is
another piece of equipment that I've
got. This is my camera. This is going to
be my special effects. So, we're going
to show every single plate warm up and
I'm going to be posting that on
Instagram. Hope you're following me on
Instagram. If you're not, go and click
follow. What are you even doing? Next
up, what am I drinking through my
session? This is water with
electrolytes. So it's pink because I've
got it's a hydrolyte tablet. So it's
just sodium, potassium, magnesium.
That's electrolyte. But it also has half
a teaspoon of salt. So every liter I'll
put one level teaspoon of salt because
that's the electrolytes that I need. So
that's how I rehydrate myself. Uh ever
wondered why your sweat that you're
trying to replenish doesn't taste like
tap water? It's because tap water
doesn't contain these electrolytes. So
every time you drink plain water, I know
that you're not rehydrating yourself.
correctly. So, that's the water that I
drink, especially through my sessions.
Preworkout. Pre-workout. I've already
had my coffee, so I've had uh a long
black with a bit of honey. And then if
someone upstairs offers another coffee,
I'm going to say, "Yes, please get me
another one." But that's as strong as it
gets. I don't really like preworkouts
because, you know, what goes up must
come down. And I don't like that
feeling. Um, next thing. Let's have a
look at the equipment that I'm squatting
on. A lot of people have a problem with
my squat rack. Let's check it out. This
is a weightlifting rack. It's a Leo. Um,
it looks really, really flimsy, but
that's what I like about it. So, look at
that. That's not going to fall over.
It's just not. So, what happens when
you're using a power rack that's bolted
into the floor? When you finished the
rep, usually what happens is you come in
and you you you rerackck
it. That doesn't happen. The squat rack
is fixed. And a lot of the times if
you've got a heavy weight and you reckon
it, it goes boom and you'll bounce off.
So you have to be very very delicate
with how you place it. But with
this, I don't mind if it lifts. That's
fine. That's locked in. So people say,
"Go and buy a new power rack." Come and
have a look what I've got here. So this
is the professional IPF spec Leico combo
rack. So that's what they use in
powerlifting competition at the highest
level in IPF competition. Um, this is as
good as it gets, but have a look at how
I put my racks in this bar here. It's
not exactly the position I want. It kind
of when I'm holding the barbell, it gets
in the way of my arm. So, I don't like
that. Here's the next alternative is a
mono lift, which is even better. So,
this is one of those ones where the
barbell goes here and instead of having
to walk out the squat
rack, I stay on the spot and I move the
squat rack until the squat is finished.
I could use that, but I just love the
idea of walking out my squats,
especially when I'm squatting only under
300 kg. When I used to compete in
powerlifting competition, it was always
rafted knees. And my last squat, I took
the Australian record with a 375 kg in
competition. That's when I really
appreciate using a monolith. Uh I even
got heavier than that in my training,
which we'll talk about at another time.
But that's with knee wraps. I was a lot
bigger than I was 110 kg weight class.
Uh, right now I weigh 100 kg, so I'm not
as strong. Um, and therefore my goal is,
yeah, today 285 kg. My short-term goal
is to get back to 300 kg raw at 100 kg
body weight. I think that's a pretty
cool number. But first things first,
let's do 285 kg. Um, I like to start
with a belt on the loose setting. Let's
have a look at this. So this is my first
warm-up set. So low bar squat. Look at
my hand position. and it's really really
wide. That's because it takes me time to
warm up my shoulders especially. So this
first set I'm just going to do reps and
reps and reps and reps. Probably, you
know, 10 or so reps. I've lost count,
but that's about right. I might do one
more set of that and
then start adding plates.
So the rule with how close you hold the
bar is this. This is my rule. Hold the
barbell as close as your shoulder
mobility allows. For me, my shoulders
are so tight that especially with the
first warm up weight, like that's quite
tight for me. But then as I get warmer
and warmer, you're going to see I'm
going to bring my hands in closer and
closer and closer. So, ideally, this is
probably where I'm going to be able to
get to on my top set. But look how I try
and get in it now. It's like, oh, it's
my shoulders aren't warm enough yet. So
the reason why we have our hands as
close as shoulder mobility allows is for
upper back tightness. So when I bring my
hands in close close, my shoulder blades
are coming in. So that's the muscles of
my middle back which is the romboids and
trapezius are being engaged to support
my upper back. So if you feel like
you're folding the upper back with your
squat, that's probably why because you
don't have those middle back muscles on.
Now here's the thing. hands close, but
then also elbows back. So, that's the
cue that I have to engage those muscles
of the upper back. But that's not all.
Don't just go elbows back. A lot of
people at home are thinking, "No, that's
a bad cue. That forces you to fall
forward." It does if you don't pair it
with this next cue, which is elbows
down. So, it's elbows back for the
midback, elbows down for the lats.
Increase the distance between the
shoulders and the ears. So, when you see
people with the elbows back and they're
doing this and they're shrugging, that's
no lats. The lats are meant to bring the
shoulder girdle down, not up. So you
can't shrug and depress at the same
time. We want depression for lats. So
elbows back, shoulders down. That's
where you get a really strong upper back
and the lower back. So elbows back is
upper back. Elbows down is lower back.
And that's going to allow you to load
the most weight possible on your back so
that your legs can do all the work.
That's the technique that I'm going to
try and use from the warm up all the way
to the top set. Uh I'll tell you a
little bit about my warmup process. If
you notice, I've done I've done tons and
tons of repetitions already. Um and I
didn't have much rest in between those
sets. That's the rule that I follow.
Lots with the warmup. Lots of reps of
the light weight. But then as it gets
heavier and heavier, all I'm going to do
is one rep, one rep, one rep.
Technically, I'm warm now, but now it's
not about warming up my knee joints or
my hip joints. It's about priming my
nervous system to handle a heavier load.
That's why I can't go, "Yeah, I'm warm,
so let's just go straight to 280 kg." I
need to get my nervous system engaged so
I know exactly what that's going to feel
like.
[Music]
Yeah. Yeah. You got to be careful. But I
know the mechanics of these barbells.
You see, you can't just go loading a red
plate or willy-nilly on one
side. But this is a 25 kg barbell. This
is a squat bar, so it's a little bit
more stable. Um, and I'm going to be
using uh plastic clips. So, that's so
far right now we have 75 kg. That's
going to be my first warm up. Uh, and
the way that I've done this is I like
for my barbell to look nice and clean.
So, I've already pre-planned how it's
going to look. It's going to be two red
plates and then four more blue plates on
each side. So, six plates
total. So, six blues is
260 on a normal
bar. Take one of those blues and swap it
for a red, that's 270. Swap for two
reds, that's
280. And swap this barbell, this is a
squat bar, is 25 kg. So, that makes it
285 kg. Very easy to put it like that.
Yeah, good question. And I don't know
the perfect answer. Apparently in
powerlifting they say you have to put
the first plate so that the numbers are
inwards so that anyone can see and read
that that's a 25 kg plate. Uh that must
be for the people that are also color
blind because we also know that the red
plate is 25 kg. But technically if
you're a powerlifter the first plate
goes inwards and then the rest of them
point outwards.
I'm going to record myself for my top
sets. Well, as it gets more and more and
I always record myself um through my
phone. Check this out. So, I've got my
my tripod that I set up for each
session. And it's not just for vanity.
Uh it's because I want to have a look at
So, this set that's that's like I know I
did that well. Uh, but as it gets
heavier and heavier, I'll tell you what
happens. A lot of the times, how you
feel is a lie. I learned that from John
Bros. Uh, so you might come in and, uh,
for my my warm-up sets approaching uh,
the my top set, I'm going to be doing,
you know, 22 225, then 245, then
265 before I do the my 280. So, I'm
going to go up in 20 kg jumps. And I
promise you, the
265 will feel quite heavy.
What happens is sometimes we get a
feeling that oh my goodness that was
really really heavy. Um do I have it? Do
I not? You come back have a look at the
camera and in my experience you come
back and look at the camera and it's
like oh that didn't look as heavy as
what you think it did. Therefore you
need to ask yourself does that look like
you've got 20 kg more? If you just base
it purely on how you felt the answer
might be no. But then you get your
second opinion here and you look at it
and you say does this guy have another
20 kg in him? I think he does. So,
that's the logic behind having another
set of eyes for you. Let's talk rest
times. So, right now, I give myself
enough time to load the plates. That's
how much time I'm giving myself to rest.
That could take me about 2 minutes. Uh,
that's fine. But then, as it gets
heavier and heavier, I'm going to
increase the length of that rest. So the
rest that I'm going to give myself when
I get to the top set. So my last warm up
265. I'm going to give
myself about 6 to 8 minutes. So maybe
even closer to 8 minutes. But as I'm
warming up, I don't need to give myself
that much time. I'll cool down if that's
the case. So right now when the weight
is light, I'll give myself, you know, 2
minutes. And I don't time 2 minutes. I
take my time with loading the plates.
And I say however long it takes me to
load the plates, that's how long my rest
is. uh it would probably be about two or
so minutes. That's totally fine. But
then when it gets to 200
kg, that's when I'll probably bring it
up to about, you know, 5 minutes rest.
And then and then when it gets to 265
kg, I'll take it up to about 6 to 8
minutes rest, depending on how it feels.
[Applause]
So the increments that I'm doing because
the first plates whenever I'm doing reds
I do 25 kg jump which is a a 10 and a 2
and 1/2. So for the first warmups it's
25 kg jumps but then after this so now I
go two reds which is going to be 125 kg
and then after this I'm going to do the
blues. So therefore just to keep it easy
I don't do 25 kg jumps after that. I do
20 kg jumps. Okay. So now it's two reds
and then it'll be 20 kilo jumps from
there. So it's
125 145 165 185
205 225 245 265
285. What's the next question you ask
me? Isn't that too many sets? Uh no, not
for me because I give myself adequate
recovery. And have a look. All I'm doing
now is one rep in between them.
So, one rep on 125 is not fatiguing,
it's stimulating for the next set, which
is going to be
145. And that's my process, which I've
taught myself how to handle as well.
And if I don't take jumps that are 20 kg
and try and do the whole thing of I
don't want to fatigue myself, so I'm
going to do less warm-ups, I often find
that I'm under stimulated and it's
harder. So, as I said, it's not a matter
of warming up. I promise you, I'm warm
right now, especially because we don't
have the air conditioning on uh because
it's going to be better sound quality
without it. So, I'm quite warm. Um but
it's about engaging my nervous system.
Now, let me ask you a question. Have you
ever done a workout where your second
set feels better than your first set?
That's quite a a common thing that
happens. And I say to people, why do you
think that is? Do you think it's because
you haven't warmed up adequately? So, if
you think my warm-up sets are going to
be fatiguing, don't you think that first
set you just did is
fatiguing? Of course it is. That's your
top set. Yet, why were you able to do a
better second set? Because you were
better stimulated. Because you weren't
warmed up well enough in the first
place. So, that's my trick for my own
warm-ups is get used to and and
familiarize yourself with what you think
is going to be the the best incremental
increases for you, which I know mine is
roughly 20 to 25 kg jumps and stick to
that. Practice the same thing over and
over. You're not only practicing, you
know, the same warm-up increments over
and over. You're practicing the same
technique. So, have a look at what I'm
doing for each and every set. I approach
the bar the same way. I walk it out the
same way. I try and replicate the same
tempo every single set so that when I
come to the top set, I don't need to
think about
technique. I just go into
autopilot. So, right now, feet under the
hips, barbell in a low bar position,
taking a big breath to
brace, three steps
out, looking straight ahead because the
body follows the eyes. Taking a big
breath to brace and pushing my belly
into the
belt. Come down by opening my hips and
hit
depth and stand with
intent and then take my belt off. And
I'm going to do that every single
set. Looked easy as it should cuz it's
125 kg. You're probably going to notice
my level of focus is going to change as
I get this is light and I want to be
chilled. I don't want to be
hyperaroused. Um, which is a big mistake
that I made early in my career. You
know, the big psychup game. You scream
and you shout and you do the backslap
thing. Um, you know, no offense if
that's you because that used to be me,
but that's hugely fatiguing. You don't
want to be overstimulated. You're using
all of your energy when you I don't need
energy for 125 or 145. I need energy
when it matters. So sometimes, you know,
this comes with experience. You've got
to be able to pace yourself so that
you've got the right amount of
stimulation, but
also not too much. So I don't want to
come into if I come into my last warm-up
set under araroused, so 265, and I'm
like, "Oh, I got to be chilled because
my first top set is where I need to be
using that energy." that 265 could
really sit me down. It's 20 kg lighter
than what my planned top single is, but
I still have to take it seriously
because it's really heavy. And if I
don't take it seriously enough, uh,
yeah, I might not get that rep. So, it's
about giving the right amount
of psychup or arousal, whatever word you
want to use, for the right amount of
weight. But then when it comes to 285,
even 265, the last few sets, you're
going to see I don't want to talk to you
anymore.
So, when it comes to having people
around, and this goes for you and your
training partners out there, have some
respect for your lifters. If they're
going for a top weight, stop asking them
what they did on the weekend. It's the
worst thing to talk about. Not because I
hate you. I love you. I love you all,
but I just don't want to talk before a
top set.
Turn off the recorder first so it
doesn't waste my space.
Do you always use clips? No. So, we got
the option of the plastic clips. Uh,
depends on how much weight I want to
use or these metal clips. This is what
it's used in competition. These weigh 2
1/2 kg each. So, if I was to go for a
round number, so 290, I'd be doing it
all with these silver clips instead. But
now, because I know I'm going to hit
285, the clips, those are essentially 0
kg. Um, so that's the reasoning for why
I use a lot of the plate configurations
that I use. I want it to look nice.
Also, you know, it's not just about
looking nice. Of course, that too. Um,
but it's also just about ease of use
with my warm-ups. You know, 20 kg jumps,
blue and then green, and then another
blue and then a green, then another
blue, then a green. And it's consistent
the whole way up. So, I like to keep it
clean for that reason as well.
[Music]
Good. So, the time of the video, that's
how I time my sets. That was at 11:52.
It's now
11:54 and right now that's fine. Ready
to squat after this. So, this is uh
going to be
185. Have a look at what I'm doing with
my grip. I've brought my hands in
slightly and that's what I'm going to
keep on doing now. My shoulders are
getting
warmer. Check out my hands. I use this
three finger grip. So, my pinky is
underneath.
This is recommendation for people that
have shoulder mobility issues. So when
you grab it with four fingers, look at
the the wrist position that it changes.
It forces my arms to come out more. So I
need more mobility to get my hands in
this four finger position. So three
fingers allows me to position my wrist
in a way that allows for people with
tight shoulders to get in a better
position. But this is while I'm warming
up. When I want my top set, I want max
tension. I'm going to be even closer and
that's when that's going to be the first
set. I'm going to get all four fingers
on the bar or all five fingers on the
bar and grab it with a full fist. That's
the tightest position. That takes time
to get in because it's really tight. But
tight is good. That's where I'm locked
in and that's going to be the strongest
position. But for right now, it's 185
and I'm not fully warm. So, I'm using an
easier position, a lot more comfortable
on the shoulders.
[Music]
What are you looking for when you watch
the video? Speed. Speed. So technique of
course technique is looking fine. They
look pretty similar. Uh you know I've
been doing it for 20 years but of course
my technique isn't always the best. It's
not perfect. Always working towards
perfection. Never achieve it. Um but um
in terms of this I'm doing all the right
things
technically. Um now all I'm doing is
giving myself a gauge of of how did that
feel compared to how did it look. Um,
honestly, it felt kind of heavy on my
back. It's like, you know, I've got to
work. And I went down and up and I
thought it came up relatively easy
speed, but now I want to imagine that I
don't know. I'm not him. I want to
imagine that I'm not him. And he's my
client. He's my athlete. And I'm going
to give him advice. And I'm looking at
it going, you've got this pretty much.
So, that was 205 kg. Does this guy have
an extra 85 kg in him? Let me see. We
don't know for sure, but I'm going to
give you a bit of a gauge. Control, hit
depth, smooth. It's looking how 205
should look if he's going for a 285
squat. So, so far so good. Next up, 220.
Check out what I do with my wrist wraps.
I haven't taken them off. I just
loosened them. So, what I do is I get
the strap and now
I That's my quick tension. So, that's
tight. So, this is loose cuz I just
loosened it for my last set. So, now I
undo it, reapply it nice and tight.
Boom. I'm ready to go. And then what do
I do on my when I'm finished? I'll undo
that, let it unravel a bit, and now it's
loose. And instead of having to take it
all the way off and reapply it and take
so much time to put your wrist wraps on,
I'm done. So this is me. This is how I
walk around. My belt is on and all I do
is clip it up and then I tighten my
wrist wraps and then I'm in. So it
doesn't take a huge amount of time and
waste a whole amount of energy uh doing
all of that. Okay, so I'm about to go.
Let's do it again. Uh what do we got?
225.
Nice and
loose.
Good. Felt heavy, but it looks good. So,
that's why I got this guy. Next up,
245. Three sets to go.
[Music]
Start giving myself 5 minutes rest
between these sets. I think
that's that's
good. Check this out. So, it's
heavier. One little notch tighter. So, I
find on my first warm-up sets that's too
tight. So, I go on the loosest setting
for the warm-up sets. Now I got three
sets to go. So I'll do the next two on
this one and then I'll save the absolute
tightest for the last one which is only
you know a centimeter tighter. Not
much
but makes a difference mentally as well.
Heavy. Feels heavy. Looks heavy. It is
heavy. It is heavy. So, I got one more
warm up set to go, which is going to be
265. I know I've got
265, but I want the
265 to look like I've got 285. I just
put some chalk on my back. And that is
because I'm getting tighter and tighter
and tighter. And I do not want that bar
slipping. So, I want it to grip real
tight on my back. It's getting heavy.
[Applause]
felt okay. Felt heavy, but it's supposed
to feel
heavy. But it's not whether it feels
heavy or not. It's whether it feels like
I've got 285 or not. And the answer is
yes. I got
285. I got
285. Okay, let's do it.
[Music]
[Applause]
So, as
I go through the sets, they get slightly
they slip down and down and down and
down. So, for the last set, I bring it
up just a little bit. Just a little
bit. Makes it a bit tighter. Doesn't do
much, but you know, every every little
bit counts.
Let's go.
That was tough. That was limit
man. Thanks,
bro. Ah, another friend.
Yes. Ah, you know, that was a
grinder. I haven't had a grinder like
that for a while. Um, but it's good
because it teaches me my limitations. I
teach people with strength training to
not train like that all the time, but
every now and then it's
okay. Yes. 285. So, um, a little bit of
context. I quit powerlifting at 40 years
old. I'm 43. Um, so I quit competitive.
Well, my last comp was 38, but then co I
was still training for comps. And then
at 40, I said, you know what, done. Work
on other things, family, business, all
those
things. So, I lost weight immediately.
So, at that age, I was about 118
kg. Competed in the 110 class, but I was
really pushing it at that point. So, I
thought, you know what? I'm sick of
being big and heavy. is uncomfortable
and unhealthy. So that's why the age of
40, you know what? No more of that. So I
brought my body weight down like really
really quickly and I'm 100 kg and I've
been this body weight since
then. And this is a PB at this body
weight. 285
kg raw. I've done this and more with
knee wraps. Just add a bit of context. I
get about 50 kg out of knee wraps.
So, yeah. Oh, that was
tough. There was a point in there where
I thought cuz sometimes that's how it
feels like you come out of the hole and
it's like, "Yeah, it's up and then it's
like, oh no." And then all of a sudden
it just stops and then you dump. That's
how it feels when you fail a rip a rep.
But that's not what happened. We kept on
going. Uh 285 big tick. Uh new PB
unlocked. The goal is 300.
The goal is 300. I'm not going to keep
on going up by 5 kg each week. I can't.
So, that was me. That was my limit. Uh,
I'm not going to keep practicing
singles. If I do uh singles, it won't be
max out singles. So, it'll be like maybe
a top submaximal single, but I've got to
change my approach now and do another
phase of come back, do a bit of volume,
work on other weak points, and then and
then
retest those numbers, you know, in in I
don't know, maybe 8 weeks or 12 weeks, a
few phases down the line. Um, I'll
probably just run the same 12week
program or something similar. Um, which
I don't know, I'm thinking of giving it
to you guys. Do you guys want a free
12week squat program? the same one that
I'm on. Should I do you want a 12week
program? Fine. That's what I'm going to
do. I'm going to give you a 12week squat
program. Uh we do involve squatting two
times a week. So, if you're on a big
squat, squat two times a week. So, just
so you know, with powerlifting style
squats, they're not very good,
especially the way that I do it for
building quadriceps. It's a very hip
dominant movement with a low bar. Like,
I bend my hips, but I I don't bend my
knees that much. So therefore, if that's
the only squat pattern you do, you're
not going to build very good quadriceps.
So this is my recommendation with the
powerlifting style program is always
include direct quadricep work to
complement the low bar squats. So I'm
going to show you right now my favorite,
if you've been following on Insta, my
favorite quadricep building squat, which
is a high bar squat with a high heel
elevation. And that's what we're going
to be doing for our accessory work. Is
that the session? Oh yeah. And then I
compare that with hamstring curls. And
then that's my session. Yeah. I don't do
a huge amount of exit. Like that's I
don't know how long that took. Um that
there you go. That took me more than 1
hour. So I take a long time to rest. But
it's not because I did a lot of work. I
mean I did a heavy weight but it's you
know that last one was 8 minutes rest
and then 6 minutes rest and five lots of
resting to to do that. So actually I'm
pretty tired. Um but the high bus what
with elevated heels I'll probably go to
I don't know 180 190 200 something like
that. Um, so not too heavy now. Um, but
take my uh quadriceps through the full
stretch and a full range of motion for
the knee joint which complements this um
moving forward. So yeah, after that I
might do like one or two sets of
quadricep, probably two sets of those
squats, and then I'll do three sets of
hamstring curls and then that's my
session.
Complimementary. Interestingly, so a
back top set back down set. That's a
really great programming style set. The
idea is to do high RP for the top set,
but the problem with high RP for a top
set is hugely fatiguing, really hard to
recover from, and you can't do set after
set after set of high RP. But the
problem with that is that's not enough
volume to stimulate muscle growth. So
that's the idea of top set, back down
set. The top set stimulates strength.
And then the back down set allows you to
do a little little bit more volume with
a lower intensity and a lower RP. Of
course, it's a lower weight, but I can
do a low weight with a high RP as well.
So, I can do I can strip 50 kgs and take
that to fail. That's not the point. So,
that's just another set of training to
fail, which is hugely exhausting. The
idea of top set back down set is to use
a lower RP. So, that was zero reps in
reserve. That was an RP 10, let me tell
you. But my back down work, I'm going to
be looking for roughly about, you know,
a seven a seven RP. So I want to leave,
you know, roughly three reps in reserve,
but then do multiple sets of that's the
idea of the top set back down set is the
top set stimulates strength. The back
down set allows you to accumulate volume
so you can continue to build muscle
which complements your top end strength.
But that's not what this is now. This is
top set and then accessories to
complement my top set. So I've just
stripped the bar because uh that bar is
thick and it's uh tough nurling and I
don't know, high bar squats, I don't
need that. So, I've gone back to a
weightlifting bar. The bumper plates,
it's a little bit bendy. Um, it's just
softer, you know, it just feels nicer.
But either way, 175 kg. Look how high
heel the high the heel elevation is. Um,
that's going to allow me to be nice and
upright and maximize my knee bend and
it's going to be an effective quadriceps
builder. So, last session I did this for
170 kg for 2x5. So, now I'm going to go
up by 5 kg. I'll see. I'm pretty tired.
Uh yeah, the goal
175 for five. Let's go. Paused. Deep
high bar. Let's go.
[Music]
[Applause]
Come
on. Come on.
One more set. When I do my squats, my
low bar squats, you know, I've got this
this wide stance and I' it's hip
dominant. I'm folding in half and not
much knee bend, but a lot of hip bend.
Watch the position
here. Maximal knee bend, not much hip
bend. So this doesn't strengthen much
quads. So if that's all I do, I'm going
to
have underdeveloped
quadriceps. So although that's specific
for what I need in competition, having
strong quadriceps is still going to be
beneficial. So it depends on what your
goal is. But when you start, so this is
my rule. First exercise of the day is
your highest priority. So for me,
powerlifting squat. Second exercise of
the day is the joint angles, muscles,
and ranges of motion that you've
neglected in the main movement. So, what
a lot of people do that I don't agree
with is low bar squat and then more hip
extensor style movement. I've already
done my hip extensors. Why do more?
Those are beaten up if you train it hard
enough the first time. So, I've already
done my hip extensors now. That's what I
choose. So, it doesn't have to be this.
It can be any type of like hack squat or
something that's quad dominant, but this
is one thing that I love doing. It's
called a stiletto squat. Like you're
wearing high heel stilettos or a cyclist
squat. If you get offended when you are
told you're wearing stilettos. Call it
what you like. I don't care. But that's
the idea of it. Elevate the hell out of
the heels so that you can bend your
knees maximally.
minimize the hip bend. So, you're
really, really focusing on quads as well
as maintaining neutral spine. Watch
this. When I get off the heel elevation,
look what my back does to be able to get
that position. So, that's the idea of
this squat. Really good squat pattern.
And no, it doesn't hurt my knees. It's
good for the knees, actually. And
remember, like this weight here, that's
175. It's a lot lighter than what I can
do. But either way, I've developed this.
I didn't start with this much weight. I
started with a light weight. So if you
feel like bending your knees hurts you,
bending your knees that much hurts you,
start light. Start with an empty barbell
and gradually increase and actually it's
good for your knee joint to keep them
strong. So I'm 43 years old. My knees
bend all the way with no
problem. And I hope to keep it that way.
How do I do that? By keeping that range
of motion strong for as long as I can.
I'll show you how to take these off.
Right. So these are the really stiff
Inza knee wraps. I'll show you how to
take them off. here. Fold it in half.
Right? So now it's comfortable. And then
instead of trying to pull off, that's
not going to come off. That's too tight.
So ideally, you're still sweaty from the
session and you're using the moisture to
slip it off. And it's as easy as that.
What's next? What's next? Hamstring
curls. Let's do some hamstring curls.
I'm going to do three sets of eight
hamstring curls. And that's a really,
really complete lower body session. The
only thing that I haven't touched is my
calves.
Um, but you know the solution to that is
wear these shoes and they make your
calves look big and you don't have to
train them. But you know what? To be
honest with you, powerlifterss don't
really need, this is something a bit
controversial and maybe you guys can
disagree with me in the comment section,
but powerlifterss in my opinion don't
need big calves. You want proof of this,
go and have a look at the best
powerlifter in the world, Colton
Engelre. I don't know if I pronounced
his name correctly. He's a unit. No one
said mentioned this. Sorry, bro. Please
don't hate me. But he doesn't have very
big carbs. And then you know who else?
So the debate of who's the best
powerlifter in the world, who's the the
current greatest powerlifter of all
time. You know, of course that's Ed
Cohen. But now this is going to be the
new generation. There's there's two
people that that come to mind when it
comes to uh who's the greatest
powerlifter, Colton the limit breaker.
And the next one, Bilbo Swagans. That's
John Hack if you're following. And if
you zoom in on his calves, his calves.
Sorry, John Hack. I love you, bro, but
they're not very
big. Neither am I. You know what I mean?
So, you're still pretty cool, bro.
You're still cool with me. Anyway,
there's my argument. You don't need
strong calves to be a good powerlifter.
You do if you want to run around like in
strongman, right? So, that's one of the
most common injuries that I see in
strongman is torn Achilles tendons from
running around with like heavy frames or
farmers carries or big yolk. and
running, there's a lot of demand on your
ankles and your Achilles tendon will
snap if it's weak. But as a powerlifter,
do you actually need calves? Maybe it's
stronger to not have big calves because
because Colton and and John Hack don't
have big
calves. Now we know. Now we know. Hammy
curls.
Yeah. So that's a good question. What's
better, seated or or laying? So, this is
laying hamstring curl. Um, technically
the seated hamstring curl allows you to
strengthen the hamstrings in a fully
stretched position because you're, you
know, you're you're in this angle here
and then when you're laying down, it's
kind of it relaxes the hamstrings a
little bit. So, the discussion is and I
believe there's even research that
supports seated builds more muscle than
laying. But here's the next thing.
Sometimes opt optimal isn't practical. I
don't own a seated hamstring machine and
I know there's a lot of gyms that don't.
Um, mine's a laying hamstring machine.
So, just because it's not the best
doesn't mean it's still not effective.
Um, so it's very effective to train the
hamstring curls in the laying
position through knee joint flexion.
Right. So, this is actually a complete
lower body minus the calves. A complete
lower body u session. So I've done my
hip extensors with the low bar squat, my
knee extensors with um you know the high
heel elevated squat and the muscles that
I've neglected is the hamstrings. So
hamstrings are responsible for hip
extension except for one of the heads of
the hamstrings which is the short head
of the biceps
forous only bends the knee. So it
doesn't do anything to the hip joint. So
that's one part of the the whole
routine. That's one muscle that we
haven't targeted for our upper thigh is
the short head of the hamstrings.
There's also another one. Put in the
comments se section if you know your
anatomy and you know all that stuff.
What have I missed out on? There is one
muscle that I've kind of missed out on
and it's not a hamstring muscle.
[Applause]
10 reps. That was 10 reps. Uh, and it
was pretty light, so I'm going to go
heavier. That was the first set, so I'll
go heavier. Um, but that doesn't count.
The warmup set doesn't count. Probably I
just went up by two plates. Like, I'm
warm. Remember that I'm warm. I've just
done a really big session. So, one
warm-up set will suffice. It's not
really a warm-up set. It's just a feel
set, we could call it. There's a
difference between warm-up set. I'm
already warm. That's a feel set. Uh, so
now one feel set. I'm good to go. I'm
going to do three sets of eight. And
then that's my whole session. Um, you
don't have to watch me doing the sets.
That was my leg session. Remember, I've
got a 12week squat program that I'm
giving you guys. So, comment below the
word, give me a program. What word
should we do? There's going to be a link
in the description below, and all you
need to do is click it, and uh, I'll
send you a free
12week squat program that I follow to
get a good squat. That's if you think I
have a good squat. I think I do. Do you?
I don't know. Anyway, click like,
subscribe, all that stuff. I'll see you
next time.